---
layout: post
title: A Cursory Review of ML in Biology
---

One of the most tantalizing aspects of machine learning, particularly in scientific domains, is the ability to process unwieldy amounts of data that would otherwise be infeasible to sift through. This is certainly the case in biology, where the human genome, for example, contains approximately 3 billion DNA base pairs – an amount that could take a lifetime for a single researcher to process completely on his or her own. In recent years, bioinformatics and computational biology – subsets of biology that use computers to gather, store, analyze, and integrate biological data – have grown rapidly to expand scientific research capabilities beyond these traditional human limitations.

I myself spent the past 3 months as a visiting researcher at Yonsei University’s Network Biology Lab, which specializes in the field of bioinformatics. According to the lab’s page, “the ultimate goal of biological research is to manipulate traits that are important for medicine, agriculture, and bio-industry.” With this objective at heart, the NetBioLab focuses on network-guided approaches in establishing predictive relationships between genotypes and phenotypes. To explain in slightly more detail, we use publicly available “multi-omics” data to, among other things, construct probabilistic functional gene networks. We then use network propagation algorithms, such as guilt-by-association, to predict gene functions, the phenotypic effects of loss-of-function, and epistatic interactions within these networks.


One of the projects I worked on in my time at the lab was a text-mining initiative that used machine learning to scan through databases of paper abstracts and identify ones with information pertinent to our larger research goals. The objective here was to create an efficient method of sifting through the countless publications that are published every year and save ourselves time in journal review. In our case, we were looking for papers that revolved around transcription factors that regulate gene expression in mice. This proved tricky, as we had to use Natural Language Processing (NLP) methods to exclude cases where there was 1) mention of transcription factors but no regulation of gene expression, 2) mention of gene expression but no identification of transcription factors, and 3) evidence of transcription factors regulating gene expression but in species other than mice.

It should be noted that we leaned heavily on work done by Professor Juhl Jensen, head of the Cellular Network Biology Group at the University of Copenhagen, pioneer of the use of text-mining in bioinformatics research – and someone I was, quite fortunately, able to meet personally at a conference back in Seoul.

Another project I worked on at NetBioLab was building a co-expression network with human RNA-sequencing data, both at the bulk and single-cell levels. Here, we used machine learning algorithms to help process the sequencing data and identify patterns that potentially implied functional relationships between different genes. Additionally, in areas of the field outside of my own work, computational biologists are using unsupervised clustering methods to identify different cell types (e.g. healthy and unhealthy cells within a single tumor) and exploring the capabilities of deep learning in drug discovery.

While this is by no means a comprehensive overview of machine learning in biology, I hope it highlights many of the interesting and exciting ways artificial intelligence is already changing the world around us, particularly through biomedical research – a cause for optimism as we look to both the near and long-term future.
