---
layout: post
title: AlphaGo & Deep Learning in Healthcare
---

In March 2016, Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo defeated Lee Sedol, one of the world’s best Go players, four games to one in a best of five series. This marked one of the greatest publicized achievements in AI since IBM Watson’s 2011 victory in Jeopardy over former winners Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, and drew many comparisons to Deep Blue’s 1997 victory over chess champion Garry Kasparov.

AlphaGo’s victory over Lee was a monumental achievement in AI for several reasons. First, as DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis said, “Go has always been the pinnacle of perfect information games. It’s way more complicated than chess in terms of possibility, so it’s always been a bit of a holy grail or grand challenge for AI research.” The countless number of possible combinations of play in Go meant that traditional AI methods, such as alpha-beta pruning and tree traversal, were infeasible, and most experts believed a Go program as successful as AlphaGo to be at least 5-10 years away. DeepMind, however, with its use of a combination of neural networks and deep reinforcement learning was able to train AlphaGo to probabilistically determine the best move to play, leading to unprecedented success. Second, with the 37th turn of the second game, AlphaGo played a move that confounded Lee and Go professionals around the world  – a  move that, upon later review, was shown to have helped lead the program to victory – giving a small glimpse into the potential for AI to surprise and revolutionize the status quo, even in well established domains such as Go.


So, what’s next for DeepMind now that it’s conquered the ancient game of Go?

The Google-acquired company has made it clear that healthcare is an area they would like to venture into, and has announced a collaboration with Moorfields Eye Hospital to apply deep learning to the identification of the early signs of diabetic retinopathy and other degenerative eye conditions. In the words of DeepMind co-founder Mustafa Suleyman, “There’s so much at stake, particularly with diabetic retinopathy. If you have diabetes you’re 25 times more likely to go blind. If we can detect this, and get in there as early as possible, then 98% of the most severe visual loss might be prevented.” As Suleyman suggests, the potential for good here is high, and we are entering into exciting times, where it isn’t inconceivable to think of machines with the ability to guide our medical well-being with perhaps even higher precision that trained specialists. In fact, training neural networks to assess eye scans in the place of human physicians could vastly increase both the speed and accuracy of diagnoses and potentially save thousands from harmful complications, particularly loss of sight.

However, despite the cause for optimism, there are clear headwinds ahead that will make it difficult for AI systems to make progress in the area of healthcare. For one, patient privacy remains a contentious topic. It is extremely harmful for our private medical data to fall into the wrong hands, and governments have accordingly set layers upon layers of regulations (see: HIPAA in the US) to see that our data is safely managed. However, these same regulations make it difficult for third-party organizations, such as DeepMind, to access and utilize our data, and have historically made it difficult for technology in healthcare to catch up with that of the rest of industry. Additionally, electronic medical record data is well-known to be rife with errors and inconsistencies, stemming from a variety of reasons, including updates in software, changes in medical device hardware, and human error. As a result, most if not all datasets used would require an incredible amount of pre-processing to allow for any real insight or training.

With regards to the issue of privacy, DeepMind has attempted to circumvent the problem by seeking partnerships with well-established healthcare organizations and by soliciting individuals to willingly submit their medical data for research. Elsewhere, Carnegie Mellon University has suggested a model of having each hospital train an AI system on its respective data before passing it onto the next one, avoiding the need for a single organization to have access to the data in its entirety at any given point. All of these methods seem like promising leads to allow for a scenario where AI is given a fair chance to change the world of healthcare – let’s just hope that they, along with the needed academic and technological advances, are realized soon.
