---
layout: post
title: Will AI Bring the Next Industrial Revolution?
---

There’s been a lot of commotion lately over the existential threat of AI, largely in part due to Elon Musk, who has stirred up debate by continually going on record to say that AI is the “biggest risk we face as a civilization”. Musk has, in particular, expressed concern over the concentration of AI power at the current tech giants, including Google and Facebook, that are clearly leading the pack in terms of both the amounts of data they store and the quality of AI talent they hire. Conversely, CEO of Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, has publicly stated that he believes Musk’s fears are overblown and irresponsible, even. Zuckerberg has rather praised the virtues of AI and taken an optimistic view of the potential future opportunities in store for society. Elsewhere, former Chief of AI at Baidu, Andrew Ng, has been quoted as saying, “worrying about evil AI is like worrying about overpopulation on the planet Mars,” suggesting that Terminator-style AGI is currently so far-fetched that there is no rational reason to fret over such a future. Ng also cast his suspicions on Musk’s motivations for his public comments, implying that OpenAI, a company that Musk has a significant stake in, has much to gain from a growing public fear of AI.

Indeed, the debate over the safety of AI is a hot one and there are strong arguments for both sides. But regardless of which side they toe the line from, most AI experts can agree on one thing - that AI will be the harbinger of a global shift in the job market. In fact, several thought leaders - economists, computer scientists, historians alike - have predicted AI to bring on an economic revolution akin to the Industrial Revolution, where the advent of manufacturing greatly improved the standard of living but cost countless workers their then-deemed-obsolete jobs in the process. Similarly, AI looks to threaten several industries as a whole. Self-driving cars and trucks, for one, will continue to displace cab and truck drivers across the country. New methods in natural language processing will continually replace lower levels of journalism. And improved image recognition may do away with certain medical specializations like radiology altogether.

In response, several futurists have suggested that the United States be prepared to offer a universal basic income, a standard amount given to individuals to live off of, given that there won’t be many jobs left to acquire. But venture capitalist Marc Andreessen thinks otherwise. In a recent interview with Tim Ferriss, Andreessen suggested that the fears over AI job displacement are overblown, citing statistics that show that the United States, for the past several years, has been creating more jobs than it has been displacing - a favorable trend that Andreessen is banking on to continue. He does admit, however, that these new jobs are likely to be very different in nature to the ones they’re displacing and that individuals will have to be retrained with skills that won’t easily be replaced by AI.

While which skills will remain important for humans to acquire and retain is its own hot topic of debate, there is a consensus that abilities that revolve around people and creativity will be chief among them. After all, who among us would want to be comforted by the bedside manner of a robo-doctor, even if it was the one that made the correct diagnosis? Similarly, while technologic artistic advances such as DeepDream have recently caught the world’s attention, it’s difficult to see AI fully disrupting an industry that, at its essence, is concerned with human self-expression. 

Again, though, much of this is speculation. As noted by many of the foremost AI experts in the world, it’s incredibly difficult to accurately predict the changes that arise from technology, including when and where it will happen. But we do know this - that AI is coming and along with it will come massive shifts in society. The question is, will you be prepared?
